Welcome to the Empowerful Cycling Podcast. I'm your host, Coley Moore, and I want to thank everybody for listening as always. And also remember, if you have already subscribed to the podcast, well, if you haven't, please do. But if you have subscribed, please share the podcast. That really goes a long way, especially if you like what we're hearing. And we are in the middle of our metabolism series, currently on Watt's doc number 33 or 4. And so we're going to be talking about some cool stuff coming up.
And if you have any coaching and consultation inquiries, questions, comments, and especially right now is a great time to get a coach looking forward towards next year.
we have some open roster spots so please shoot me an email empiricalcycling at gmail.com and also up on Instagram as always AMAs in the stories on the weekends once in a while I do a double trying to get them up on Saturday so look for it Saturday Saturday morning if the answers don't make sense this week and I'm sorry I'm in the middle of timing a race so
So look out for that. And so today up on the podcast, we have Alex Carmona, who has been on before. He's an empirical cycling coach. And we also have Taylor Warren, who is an athlete I've been working with this year. And so we'll talk about kind of training and USA crits. And we're going to go through some, you know, kind of, you know, because these two guys are really experienced athletes, but this is their first year really raising a full, full big crit calendar.
We talk a lot about that. We talk a lot about managing the season's stress and training and recovery and travel and how many hard sessions do you do, tips for recovery. We talk about some tire pressures and we talk about lining up against the really, really big teams. So I hope everybody finds this podcast really interesting. I thought it was a really fun one to do and I'll see you on the other side of the interview.
Let's see. Let's start with Coach Alex. Alex Carmona, coach here at Empirical Cycling. So, Alex, you've had quite a race season, so tell me a little bit about it. What's the 10,000-foot overview? The 10,000-foot overview. Well, a lot of crits. I think I raced two road races, and that's not true.
I did Joe Martin. So maybe four road races and 20-something crits. And that's unusual for you because I remember when you were coming up here in New England, you were the guy who did the road races and would always smash everybody in the punchy finishes. So what's your physical kind of makeup as a rider and what are your strengths and weaknesses and how did you have to change that for a season of crits?
yeah um that's a good question and I guess something I want to just highlight is that like the last season I raced which was 2019 I didn't race a single crit it was only road races and stage races and at that point I was like I'd taken a break from racing in 2018 so I was like well if I'm gonna come back to this I'm just gonna like do what I like which is road races and stage races and I'm not gonna race a crit because I just don't have to if I don't want to um yeah so who are you uh who are you racing with what team
This past year I was racing with the BSCG support, clean support, gut and plan coaching team. Cool. All right, Taylor, how about yourself? What's the 10,000 foot view on your season and who'd you race it with? Yeah, so the 10,000 foot view, it's actually really similar to Alex's where I'd say I'm primarily a road racer and stage racer.
But in America, those races don't really exist anymore. So you have to pivot a little bit if you want to be a competitive racer at the top level these days. So, yeah, I was like similar to Alex where I did Joe Martin. So I got a lot of road races out of that, you know, like two road races. I did Pro Nats, which was a, you know, it's always an experience. And I did maybe like one or two more local road races. And then the rest of the year was the USA Crit Calendar.
And that was quite a big pivot for me as well, as far as like just tackling the demand to the crit to the high level, the mentality of racing, the lifestyle of, you know, sleeping in the hotel for the whole day and then drinking a cup of coffee at 7 p.m. to get yourself pumped up to race a crit that starts at 9. It's just a totally different ballgame. And like not only myself, but the team I race for, C.S. Velo, out of...
Philadelphia, like our whole team had to pivot and adapt because our team was developed for the PRT calendar for doing stage races and we're not the most crit savvy bunch of riders so it was definitely an adjustment period for the year. So actually that could that well you mentioned two things and I want to touch on one real quick before we move on to the other so you mentioned the mentality of crit racing so
How would you both describe the difference in the mentality of crit racing versus what you're used to with road racing? I'd say crit racing is much more intense than road racing. There's not a lot of time in a crit versus a road race. Like a road race will play out over the course of three, four, sometimes five hours. So there's a big crescendo in a road race where things tend to build and build until there's a cracking point in the race.
Whereas in a crit, especially this year, more so than I can remember from past years, it seemed like the racing was full on from the gun. Positioning is super important. So people are fighting for the front, literally a minute into the race. And that changes the mentality because you have to not give an inch to anyone and you have to protect your space in the field. And these races are more crash prone. So that's always like in the back of your mind.
So you just have to go in with maybe a little more courage than in a road race and be proactive and really responsive to what's happening around you. Yeah, I agree with everything you just said. Yeah, I mean, a road race, I think, just has a different rhythm to it. Whereas, yeah, I feel like my experience racing crits this year was just like from the gun, full on.
You know, I think going into it, I expected, oh, maybe there'll be like a lull 15, 20 minutes into the race, you know, which is, you know, people often say happens and it just didn't, you know, it just stayed full on. And I think if you wanted to do well at all, you know, you have to be moving forward and moving front. So it's just like, yeah, it's just no time to let your guard down. You always had to be focused and working. And especially for someone who's new to it, you know, you make mistakes and then you pay for them.
Um, so it's just, it was just a lot of work. Um, I feel like I've raced a lot of challenging races, but these are some of the most challenging things I've ever done on a bike. I mean, so, cause neither of you are like really new to racing. Like you've both been doing it for 10, 10 years longer now. Um, so like, you know, cause, and you both have obviously raised criteria before. So like what adjustments like needed to be made from your previous criteria experience versus, uh, this level of crits.
Yeah, I've definitely done my fair share of crits before. I mean, if you're racing in the US, you're definitely going to race crits. I think the main difference, though, is like a lot of times when I'm doing a crit, it's in the middle of a stage race. People are a little tired. The crit might not impact the overall GC outcome of the stage race. So there's not a whole lot of evidence in the crits. And, you know, like a crit at Gila, you're basically in a field of...
Pure Climbers racing a four-corner crit. And it's not slow by any means, but there's definitely like a maybe like a lack of concentration you can take and just kind of float and get a good finish and, you know, rest up for the next day. But in the USA crits, you're racing a field of pretty much pure crit racers.
People that have been racing crits all year long, and there's definitely a rhythm to crits you have to pick up on. There's like a pecking order as far as like what teams are kind of sitting near the front of the bubble. And so that's like the biggest adjustment period from a typical year to this year is going from a focused stage racer to being like somewhat of a pure crit racer and going for results as a team and as an individual in these high level crits. It's definitely something that's...
That's new to me, yes, as well as like most of the teammates I have this year. Alex, why don't you talk a bit about your experience with the pecking order? Because I think a lot of people are curious, like, what's it like racing Legion and best buddies and automatic and, you know, people who on video have, you know, pushed people into curbs, not accusing anybody directly, but...
It's definitely on video that there's a lot of really aggressive kind of stuff you might actually see in football where you don't really expect it in bike racing a lot of the time, especially at the more amateur levels. Yeah, totally. Yeah, so I think as a kind of newcomer, first time doing all these races, you know, racing on a team that, you know, is mostly, I'd say, composite riders or like, you know, guys who are maybe new to the team that year or just like guest riding for races, you know, we didn't really have.
you know a team tactic thing down and a lot of the teams are like that I would say maybe like half or so are just kind of there doing it and then yeah you have the bigger teams who are really working as a team they have a strategy they have a plan you know they have funding they have organization etc it's just a different level so I feel like you have such a variation of racers and teams in these races
So I think for me, again, as a newcomer, I was very much like a passenger to these races. I was just like holding on for dear life. And hopefully I can hold on long enough, finish and finish the race and maybe move up a bit towards the end. But, you know, I feel like, yeah, in my experience, it was like, you know, Legion, Best Buddies, ButcherBox, Automatic, CS Fellow.
Maybe like kind of a handful of riders from the other smaller teams that were really racing each other. And then the rest of us were just like trying to finish. Yeah, I mean, a similar experience to Alex. I think being on CS Velo, we started to establish ourselves like towards the end of the year. It was definitely a big learning curve. And the way the criteriums were raced were, in my experience, a lot different than even some of these like high level crits in the past.
People always talk about the UHC blue train days where you'd be racing a crit and it'd be pretty standard. Maybe some attacks are going. And then the last 20 laps of the race, United Healthcare would get on the front and just basically they'd line up their seven man team or whatever and just pin it at like 50k an hour. And so at that point, you're like not able to really move from where you are as far as position wise.
And then, like, it is a good rule. It's like, where you are 10 to go is most likely where you're going to finish, plus or minus, you know, one or two spots. But this year, it seemed like Legion was able to control the race to that degree, but for the whole race. So they would line it up on the front from the fifth lap. They'd put, you know, four guys rotating on the front and just hold the speed at 30 miles an hour, just fast enough that it stays strung out and people are having a lot.
of difficulty moving up or changing their position. So then you'd start to see this dynamic that I've seen a lot in a World Tour race where teams are just lining up like in a train. Because the only way you can combat the power of Legion is if you connect just about your whole team, all six guys in a train, rotating, swapping, riding in the wind, and basically fighting for the position at the front of the bubble.
And so you'd get this pecking order established, that's the year went on, where Legion would basically take the front in the first few laps, hold it there, and then you'd have secondary teams or maybe teams that could even win the race, like Best Buddies and ButcherBox, they would typically be fighting right behind Legion to hold their spot. And then you'd have Automatic and a team like us, CS Fellow, we'd be kind of fighting for that fourth, fifth in line spot.
Hoping to make a big push at the very end to try to overtake as many positions as we could. And then typically you'd see a big ramp up in speed coming into the last five laps. And the lead group of riders would actually separate. You'd find the top 25 guys, the speed is so high, would just kind of roll away from the rest of the field. And if you didn't make that split, you were just kind of shit out of luck. And yeah, try again the next time.
Get all six of our guys together, which riding as a team at the front of a crit is very difficult. You have people sliding into gaps and teammates getting separated. And we're all mic'd up, too. So we're trying to communicate on the headset. That gets really difficult. You can barely hear anything. It's just total chaos.
And you've got to take a hand off the bars to press the talk on your mic. I can't imagine that's easy. Yeah, I mean, half the time, I would just take my earpiece out. I was like, I can't hear shit. It's not helping. I know I'm supposed to move up. You can only use it so much to some degree. I think as we got better in the year, we were able to coordinate and use our mics more, and the headsets became actually helpful. But at the beginning of the year, it was just total chaos. And yeah, just trying to figure out how to ride together.
Hold that position as close to the front as possible. Super difficult. Yeah, so what's your take on the physical demands?
of being good at these criteriums because you're both coaches. Alex, you're with me. And Taylor, you're a coach in your own right, but I coach you. So with kind of that perspective that we're all kind of nerds on this stuff and knowing my podcast audience that you both know pretty well is just a bunch of nerds. So feel free to talk about the nerdy aspects of the fitness that you kind of need.
What ways can you adjust your racing style to smooth out the accelerations? Or maybe is it course dependent? Or maybe is it dependent on what's happening? What would you say you need as an FTP? Does a sprint do well? What kind of watch do you need to come out into the wind and move up at 30 miles an hour?
Been trying to think a lot about this just for myself and for other athletes because I feel like in a lot of ways this year kind of through what I knew about racing crits out the window and like what it requires. And I think, yeah, I think it is course dependent and it's also, I think, dependent on how good of a racer you are.
At Boise, for example, it's a flat, very fast course, four corners. It's known as being the fastest race. So there's no hills or big features in it that make it difficult or anything like that. But what I noticed, given that it was so fast, it was so hard to move up. And I just kept finding myself at the back.
you know, which is really not a good place. I think in a crit like that, because you're slowing down to the corners, having to accelerate out of them, et cetera. So I was like, you know, I started cramping a bit, I'd say maybe 25 minutes in, but, um, I was just, I was just dying. I was like, this is the hardest I've had to ride. And I like knew that I felt that I was like, I am working harder than like everyone else in the race right now. Um, so I think it, it pays so much. I think, I think more than being fit.
to be able to handle your bike well and race well. Because if you can position well and move up and know how to corner, you're barely pedaling. You're doing no work. I don't want to say no work, but a lot less work than other people in the race. So more generally, you want to be good at racing crits, learn how to corner and ride through a group. Yeah, I'd say to that same note.
crits are so heavily skill-based. Whereas a road race, you might be able to get away with subpar bike handling skills, especially if it's a fairly straightforward course. Whereas in a crit, especially these USA crits, most of the courses were fairly technical. You could be a rider with maybe a 300-watt FTP, nothing crazy.
Get top 10, get top 5 in these races, as long as you can position really well and corner really smoothly and just float as much as possible and save your energy for the last 5 laps. You'd see guys where I'd be like, for sure, I'm stronger than this guy. And he'd be beating me in the crits just because he could hold the top 15 wheels the whole race, and you're just saving so much energy at that point. But yeah, if we want to do a little deeper dive into the...
the physicality of it. I'd say like a lot of the things important for road racing are still important for criteriums like aerobic engine threshold. Like I'd compare like a lot of these USA races to almost like a elimination race on the track where you're you're not necessarily doing these huge efforts but you're riding like tempo sub threshold just to maintain position in the field and that that can tend to wear on people.
And then obviously, like most of these crits, especially the flat ones, are pretty heavy, like anaerobic sprint power based. You can look at the physics of like what it takes to come around someone. But if you're fizz online and the train and the train's going 36 miles an hour, you're probably going to have to do like, you know, 1500 watts to pass the person in front of you or so. So yeah, you need a pretty big sprint if you're going to contest these pure flat.
Sprint Finishes. And then like Alex was saying, it's also very course dependent. I really enjoy a crit with a hill in it. I'm a smaller rider, so that tends to favor me quite a bit. And I have pretty good repeatability, so not necessarily the highest.
Maximal Sprint, but I can pop off 600 watts over and over again. So yeah, hilly crits, I'd say the demand is like that anaerobic repeatability to be able to just hang in the crit first of all. And then typically those races will either at a certain point halfway through, they'll tend to break up, either a break will go or the field will split. So that brings me to a question I was going to ask you both, which is what is your favorite course for the whole year?
Yeah, I want to answer this question and also kind of touch back on what we were just talking about before. Yeah. So Winston-Salem, you know, Athens, basically all of the courses with the hill I would say were my favorite. But also, yeah, I think required more of this, yeah, repeatability where you are doing like, you know, for a smaller rider, maybe, you know, 500, 600 watts up a hill.
every lap. Being able to do that myself as a rider I think helped a lot. Whereas at Winston-Salem where most of the field isn't finishing, I was able to finish and that felt really great. Athens I was able to last a bit longer than maybe some of the guys I've been racing with. I think Athens like 150 or close to it started and I think 25 ended up finishing.
Yeah, so that shows us how hard that race is. But I guess just going back to the physical demands of it, I think being able to have that repeatability really, really helps. I guess if you're a strong breakaway rider, a strong TT guy, sure, you can maybe go off the front and just hold your effort for the whole race. But I don't think it typically or often will shake out.
that way. There's not a lot of guys who can do that, I would say. So I think, yeah, strengthening that ability to do hard efforts and recover, I think, for me, was really, really useful this year. So what do you both think was the hardest course? Oh, definitely Athens Twilight, which that also happened to be my favorite. So that might be a little sadistic, but I don't know. That was pretty fun. I ended up finishing that race, which I think...
45 minutes in, I was the only person from my team left, which is pretty wild. When you're really suffering, you think you're at the back of the field, and then you turn around, there's five people. You think you're at the front of the field, I should say, and you turn around, there's five people behind you. That's kind of a scary thing. But it was like that course, it fit my physiological profile pretty well, but also just the atmosphere.
It was kind of like you're racing through the club. Like they had a fog machine and a DJ on the stage. And I remember getting to like 10 laps to go and they're playing booty rocking everywhere. And like, it was just a ridiculous moment in my life to think about, to think back on. So yeah, Athens Twilight, definitely my favorite and the hardest. Yeah.
I think if I had to choose one, I would agree that Athens was also my favorite. And I think, yeah, just the whole atmosphere was just incredible. It was, you know, it was on the level of like Tulsa, Crybaby Hill, but maybe even like bigger. Yeah, that was a lot of fun. And I think just kind of touching on, again, the skill and stuff, you know, I think physically that or that course also fits me well. But at that point, I hadn't really dialed in the cornering well. And as you'll probably remember, like that corner coming.
After the downhill, it was a pretty wide road, but you would take a left onto like a pretty narrow road. It felt like it was like one, like a one car, like a one way street. And so that sort of like corner where that's not like a very wide open corner is like, to me, it was like, whoa, how do I take this? And how do I keep my speed through that corner so that I can carry it through that end of the course into the uphill? So for me, it was like.
I took that corner poorly, took that whole part of the course poorly. And then when I get to the hill, I'm having to sprint out of the saddle, you know, to keep my speed up. Um, yeah. So I'm assuming Taylor, you got it better than I did. Yeah. I mean, I had that same thought, same experience. Um, and there's like a, there's definitely a couple of races throughout the year where you could, you could just tell that you needed to like sprint to the front as soon as possible. Cause the race is going to break up right away. Yeah. Like I had that experience at.
Littleton, Colorado when it started raining on the start line. And so like when you're lining up for a pro crit in the rain, like people are just going to go ballistic from the front. So you have to be ready to basically just like whatever instincts are telling you to hold back, you need to ignore and just sprint as hard as you can to get as far to the front as possible. So that's pretty much what I did at Athens. Because like you were saying on that corner, there's pretty much only one line you could take fast.
So if you're not near the front, you're taking that and then you're riding single file, you're taking that corner like 60th wheel or farther back, you're getting that accordion effect super, super hard. And it doesn't matter how strong you are. If the dude on the front is doing 300 watts and you're sitting 60th wheel, you're going to be doing like 600 watts. And you can only do that for like.
for so long before you popped. So like, yeah, the importance of just being as far to the front as possible was like really evident on like a lot of the courses I raced this year. So what would you both say were your best moments from the year? And like, what was it like? Is it more like did you finishing in Athens or like was it like a result you got or was it, you know, kind of the progression through the year? Like what was your favorite thing about?
a year of USA crits. Yeah, there's several great moments, I'd say. The first one for, it was more of a team effort, was at Salt Lake City on day two. We put a rider in fourth. That was our best result so far in the series. He, I mean, he was first wheel coming into 200 meters to go and got past the line to finish fourth. So it was a really near miss.
And that was like the first time we connected as a team with maybe 10 laps to go. We all were riding super selfishly to set up our sprinter more or less. And like things just kind of clicked and came together for the first time. So that was kind of like an aha moment. We ended up winning the team classification on that day. So that was super special to be a part of that. And like I finished probably like 50th place, but I did a super hard pull with like a lap and a half to go to set up the sprinter. And it just felt really good.
to be part of something bigger. And then finishing out in Twilight, definitely another great moment to be able to finish maybe the hardest crit in the country. It's definitely an accomplishment, especially from being pretty green to the USA crit scene. And then the last great moment was I kept the year off really well by finishing fourth, the second day at Winston-Salem.
Pretty much the same field, same caliber of riders. And I was able to sniff out the winning break and finish in the lead group. So that was a super special moment. It felt like a little bit of a long time progression incoming. So yeah, combination of those three moments comprised a pretty great year for me, actually. That's awesome. Alex, how about you? Yeah, I mean, it was a tough year, I'll be honest.
I got COVID real bad. Uh, so I went to Panama actually and did like a four day race there, which was, which was an awesome experience. You know, um, I guess they were kind of sort of crit circuit races, but they were like really sketchy courses, a lot of sketchy racers. Um, I mean, it was a cool experience for sure, but it was, uh, you know, um, not my favorite racing conditions. And then I got COVID real bad.
and yeah I was like laid up for like two weeks and then took up like a month for me to like recover from just being yeah so sick so that kind of really messed things up for me but anyway putting that kind of into perspective of my season it's like you know I just wanted to I wanted to by the end of the season be able to like you know show up to a high level crit or a national level event a USA crit and be able to like you know
race it and finish decently. And that's, you know, I would say I worked to that point, you know, with Winston-Salem. Yeah, day two, didn't finish as good as Taylor, a lot of respect. But I finished 16th, which was like my best placing at like one of the bigger crits. And kind of like, was that confirmation? It's like, okay, you finally got this after a whole season of a lot of challenges and stuff, you know, because again, I went from just holding on, trying to finish.
being like, what the fuck is going on? Oops, what the hell? Can I swear? I don't know. Oh, yeah. Okay. Yeah. So I went from like barely finishing to like, yeah, I can finish top 20 on like a challenging course, you know, and not even so much the result, but it's just like I went to that day like, okay, I can take the corners. I know the lines I need to do. I feel comfortable here. I feel like in my element, so to speak. So yeah, that was, I'd say kind of my biggest, my biggest thing. It's definitely, definitely a very like learning.
a year of new experiences and getting my teeth kicked in. Yeah, and putting that accumulated experience to use and to practice and having something to show for it. Exactly. Yeah, awesome. Okay, worst moment. Alex, besides getting COVID, twice, right, actually? Well, that first time was last November. So what was your worst moment of the year?
I think COVID was Littleton probably actually well okay it's a two-way tie Littleton it was raining I historically you know I mean I crashed in a crit years ago and broke my collarbone and that really kind of it took me a bit to recover from that as far as like mentally being able to like race aggressively in a crit again so I had been not super fond of rainy crits especially for that reason so
I was like you know it's starting to rain you know let's just see how this goes just just gonna send it you know and I just within two laps I was just off the back I was gone I was like nope can't do it I just couldn't do it so that that was a real bummer um yeah I just just totally froze couldn't couldn't do it um and then yeah crashing at uh amateur nationals in the road race but like 2k to go two corners to go sitting maybe
15th or, you know, up there. And yeah, just taking a corner too hot, hitting some sand, washing out, crash pretty bad. Yep. Those are the worst moments.
As far as worst moments go, I didn't have many this year, which I'm super grateful for. Very rare in the world of cycling. I didn't crash the whole year, which I don't think I've ever done that. I think I've crashed at least once every single year I've raced. I mean, it's bike racing. Crashes are part of it.
So having a year without crashing, like that was a big win in my book. Like I did Littleton. I didn't do great. I was like maybe 40th or so, but I didn't crash, which that was like, that was a win for me. If I have to like be really strict about the worst, absolute worst moments, I'd say maybe the Joe Martin crit or like pro nationals road race, just because like those kinds of races, they're just like humbling experiences, no matter how fit you are.
so like lining up with the road race at nationals everyone's got ambitions to try to finish or do well and then you come to this realization like maybe halfway through the race that the world tour guys are just way better than you and so you just get you get shelled and that that could be like demoralizing but I mean it's maybe about adjusting expectations at the same time and then the Joe Martin crit I just had a rough day I think a lot of it was just not having done any stage racing all year.
Just like the body just didn't really respond super well to three days of hard racing in a row. And I got dropped out of that crit. But I mean, that's just me being nitpicky. Like this year was pretty great. All right. All right. So speaking of nationals. So Taylor, you were right behind the crash and the crit.
Do you have any hot takes on what happened? And both of you, what's your hot take on crit beef? I mean, the Nationals crit, it was kind of like just set up to be a shit show at the end. Like if you look at the course, you're on like a six lane road that goes up a hill and turns right into like a one lane road.
So yeah, obviously there's going to be a crash. That course is not very selective either. So it's pretty easy to sit in the field. A lot of people are fresh at the end. So I did a really good job of conserving energy in that race because I figured it would come down to a field sprint just because of the nature of the race. And so I made it my goal to just try to nose breathe the first half, just conserve, try to float.
Float as much as I could, keep the heart rate low, and then I was going to make a big push in the last 10 laps and try to just hold position. So I was trying to set up our team sprinter, trying to just like float in the top 20 for the last 10 laps. And I remember coming in the last lap, I was maybe 15th wheel, and we're coming down the back straight, the long like highway section, and we're just like sprinting up the hill like.
ate wide or something. And it was just a big game of chicken, more or less. I probably came in the third to last corner, maybe like 15th wheel. And then the second to last corner, basically what I saw was Scott McGill and Corey Williams. It was a game of chicken. They both tried to take the corner in the same line.
No one gave up, so they just crashed into each other. Like, it was just that simple. And then people were crashing into the back of them. I don't think I had to put a foot down, but I scrubbed pretty much all my speed. And yeah, I mean, that was pretty much it. Like, the crit beef is overplayed. I think a lot of it is just like drumming up drama. Like, just makes it interesting. I mean, every other sport has.
Drama. I don't know. I see it as like, in some ways, it's good for the sport. You know, people are like engaging with the fans and maybe sometimes the energy is negative, but for the most part, I think it builds up like rivalries, which is important for the sport. So it's like that East Coast, West Coast rap battles from the 90s. Exactly. You have to sell albums.
Yeah, I mean, to some extent, like, you got a lot of shit talking in every other sport. I don't know why people get so butthurt when stuff like that happens in cycling. Yeah, I would say kind of similar. I mean, it seemed kind of more for show, but, you know, maybe makes it a bit more fun or something, got some drama to things. But honestly, the whole, you know, I didn't really know what to expect doing USA crits, and I had definitely my own assumptions or ideas, but it seemed like, I don't know.
Pretty chill environment. I mean, you see the same guys every weekend and, you know, people are friendly. I, you know, there wasn't, I thought there was very little crashes, you know, and very safe racing. Um, you know, it wasn't the super aggressive, I'm gonna like cut you off and gutter you or like, you know, yeah, it just seemed very like we're here to race bikes and we respect each other and we all know how to race and we're all good here. So let's just like do this.
and finish. Let's all go home with our bones. Exactly. Yeah. Well, I mean, I think at that level, it seems like, um, I feel this way about a lot of coaches. Um, you know, I think a lot of people are like, Oh, Cole's got this beef with this guy or this other coach. And like, I, uh, you know, I, and, you know, I may disagree with people, but I think at some level, like, you know, when you can relate to other people, um,
in a certain way, you know, you can disagree, but there's always that level of respect. Like if you're going to play chicken with somebody into that line and neither of you is going to move and you're just going to go down, you know, I think there's probably a level of respect that goes between, you know, people who are racing at that level. Definitely. Yeah. And it's like respect breeds respect. So it's kind of like a crescendo.
People are like not giving each other space or taking dangerous lines. And like, yeah, we race week in and week out with each other. So it's like people tend to start to trust each other. And then the people that are kind of newcomers or haven't been to the front of the field much, like when they get there, people don't really recognize them and might not give them the space or something like that.
It goes a long way to ride with teammates as well. You tend to get a lot more space and respect when it's you and four of your mates rather than you just riding solo trying to butt into a team's train. Because you can make your own train and they look across and they go, oh, hey new guys. I would assume. I have not been there, obviously. So it was a long season.
And one of the things that I've got here to chat about is the training and the recovery and the travel because those are all kinds of things that go together. So Alex, why don't you talk about your strategies for this year for that kind of stuff? And I bet it's going to sound a lot like the kind of stuff that Taylor and I were having Taylor do. Yeah, I mean, honestly, I really didn't.
Like how things shaked out for me, if I have to be honest. I mean, so I got COVID and that really halted any sort of progress I was making or like, yeah, fitness I had built to that point. I, you know, so I tried to rebuild as much as I could going into, uh, I believe it was like Tulsa and the nationals that was in June. Um, and then basically after that, I hit the road for July, August.
for like two months, you know, doing all the USA crits and some other stuff. Yeah. So I think I wasn't trying to say here. I'll take your time. I'll cut this out. I'll pause. Yeah. I guess for me, you know, since I was, I was driving, I was in my car, I wasn't flying it, you know, in and out to these races. So, you know, I had to factor in travel time.
I was camping a lot, or mostly camping, and sleeping in my car, which I've built out to camping and stuff. So I had to balance all of that while trying to maybe get some training rides in between these crits. But I guess my experience is you really got to build the fitness going into these. You can't expect to maybe...
progress so much because yeah, you're racing on the weekend, then you need to recover and then maybe you're traveling in between. So you're really not having good time to put in rides and like, you're maybe a new town, you don't know where you can ride. Um, maybe there's not good riding period, you know, so it just kind of makes training, um, all the more difficult. So I guess my approach given again, my suboptimal, um, lead into it was like, uh, I just need to utilize these races to build as
whatever fitness I can and then try to kind of maintain that if possible and sort of build off it. And what I found really helpful is there was like, you know, one or two times where there was like an off weekend or something. And so I really utilized that time to like get in a bunch of riding and, you know, try again, try to make up for that lack of preparation. So I'd say.
I'd say that was a huge thing for me. Those kind of like lull break weekends. Taylor, how's that sound? Sound similar? Yeah, I mean, it sounds pretty similar to Alex where to that same note where you have to come into the year with like a big reservoir of fitness because like when you're in the cycle of race, recover, repeat.
At best, you're maintaining your fitness. So the more you come in with a big base, like a big reservoir of fitness, you can try to maintain that a little bit more throughout the year. And I think, yeah, throughout the year, it seemed more beneficial to take a maintain, but heavy emphasis on recovery. Because from week to week, putting in a hard interval session,
It's not going to make you any fitter. It's just going to make you tired if you're trying to race every single weekend. So it was a little bit of picking and choosing times to maybe train through a crit weekend and maybe not have the best performance at the benefit of doing well maybe a month down the road. Or just trying to figure out if the best situation was to take a couple days easy before the crit, race the crit.
and then spend a couple days easy to recover from the race and the travel, kind of like restart that process for the next week. So, yeah, I feel I think I put a lot more emphasis on recovery, especially like travel recovery and just maintaining that stress. And then like I'm working, too. So when I get home, typically I've taken a bunch of time off from from work. So I got to get back to putting in a lot of hours when I'm in town.
So then, yeah, it just becomes like figuring out the best life, like training life stress balance becomes more of the equation than strictly like figuring out how many hours or like how much intensity to put in. I mean, I agree. I think one other thing to think about also like.
What was your intensity distribution like? Because a season of criteriums, I mean, I wrote an article and did a podcast on just this, on like, you know, you can't always be doing high intensity intervals every single day. So what was the distribution of like hard stuff, threshold stuff, like endurance kind of stuff? Yeah, I'd say most of the training I was doing was probably like endurance riding or aerobic based.
with maybe a little emphasis on threshold just to maintain the engine. But if I'm racing that many crits, I'm getting a lot of high intensity just from the racing. So it's not going to benefit me much more to come home and smash out an interval set that resembles the same exact intensity and workload of the weekend crit I just did. So a lot of it when I was home was just getting in long easy miles just to keep the aerobic system maintained and firing.
Doing some threshold work to bring that level up and maintain that. And then most of the intensity I was getting was either from the USA crit races or sometimes I would do like a like a Tuesday night track race here in San Diego. And that was basically like a substitute for an interval set. So I'd say training overall, the intensity distribution was like closer to like the aerobic side of things, maybe like a IF of like 0.6 or so.
Yeah, I'd say something similar for myself. Yeah, let the races really be the intensity and kind of like fill it in around. Like, so yeah, I did more endurance miles and then some threshold work as needed. And I think too, going into the season, it was like, you know, for not having raced in a long time, I mean, you just don't have that, you know, you don't have those situations where you're just like pushing yourself to your absolute max.
over and over again. So I felt like I kind of really needed to like get in that as much as I could in training, which isn't, it wasn't always super possible. But luckily there's a good group right around here that kind of helped, helped with that. So I thought those were pretty important parts of my preparation. I was actually going to make a comment on
Taylor's comment on coming into the season with a good reservoir of fitness. Because one of the things that I've tried to do with a lot of the people I coach, especially the pro athletes,
who have a long season of racing and not really much rest and it's difficult to get maintenance. For instance, one of them, we got his FTP up as high as it's ever been in March and he was like, oh my God, how am I going to maintain this through the year? And it was like, easy, you rest. Your FTP seems like it's dropping in the year, then you rest and it'll come right back up and that's exactly what happened. So it was like, that was the reservoir of fitness that he had.
Um, and, you know, it was super easy to kind of maintain as long as you're getting enough rest and kind of easy miles. So, um, you know, that kind of thing is, uh, it's, that's kind of been my approach and I'm actually excited to do that with you for next year, Taylor. Um, but you know, does that sound, you know, pretty, pretty common for, um, you know, other, uh, other people racing, uh, you know, long calendar like that? Yeah, I'd say so. Uh, I think, yeah, like,
To be realistic, you could probably make like 80% of the gains you're going to make is probably going to be in the offseason when you're not racing where you can actually do a proper build. And maybe you can get like 10, 20% higher fitness level throughout the year if you're resting and maybe using high intensity to like cap things off. But yeah, I think that's pretty typical. Like as far as my style of coaching as well, especially for someone racing cross or like a crit heavy year, like a lot of the work we're doing is
in the off season, just trying to build fitness. And then throughout the year, it's like, I think keeping fatigue low is probably a higher priority than trying to build more fitness. So what tips could you give people for optimizing recovery and kind of fitness maintenance? Because they're kind of two sides of the same coin throughout a long racing season. Yeah, I think.
So maybe not necessarily a person who is racing like at a pro or national level. I mean, maybe yes, but also maybe just for your kind of more active local racer who's like starting in the spring and yeah, racing through the summer, maybe even cross. It's like, you know, you have to work in actual recovery weeks or periods. And I think, I don't know, I know people do this already, but, you know, maybe working in a mid-season break where you're maybe...
you know, taking a really, really mellow week. Um, and then kind of, if you can getting a little, maybe a little training block in, um, during that. Um, I think that can go a long way. I think too, with the mental fatigue of just like having to be on, on, on, like have being able to really take, you know, at least a couple of weeks where you're like, I don't have to be at a race. I don't have to worry about any of that stuff. I'm just going to chill, relax and, uh, get some, you know, maybe longer miles in or, or just go for like a,
more chill training ride. I think that can kind of go a long way because especially this year, I don't know about especially this year, but like when I was at Joe Martin and getting into August, you know, a lot of the guys had been racing with their like burnt out. They're like, I'm done. I don't want to travel. I don't want to race. I'm like, I'm ready to just chill. And for me, I still felt pretty good. I was like, still like, I'm going to go to Joe Martin.
basically by myself and race because I want to race. Um, and I think that was really made possible because I skipped, um, uh, was the USA crit in Alabama, whatever the Alabama one was. I skipped that. I went back to Boston, Birmingham. Yeah. I went back home to Boston to see, um, some friends and stuff. And I had, you know, like a week and a half there. And I also just wrote a lot and I went for a bunch of longer rides and, you know, did a bit of training there.
And so, yeah, having that break from racing and being able to get a little training block in, I think, really helped the second half of my season. You know, I had a decent race at Joe Martin and, you know, and then at Winston-Salem. Yeah, I mean, like you said, sleep and nutrition, like very basic things, but I mean, I think 99% of recovery comes from those.
Modalities, where a lot of people are trying to use compression socks or Norma Tech boots. And a lot of that stuff can feel really nice, especially massages. But yeah, if you're not eating right, if you're not getting adequate sleep, that's just like a recipe for burnout. And then like Alex said, taking maybe a mid-season break, maybe like two mid-season breaks.
Prioritizing rest instead of doing the extra race weekend. It's like a lot of little things add up to the sustainability of a year-long race season. So I think just being honest with yourself, evaluating fatigue levels, and I think taking a break.
When you find those early symptoms of chronic fatigue, just shutting things down sooner than later is going to help a lot in the long run. You might feel trash for one weekend or two, but if your body's telling you that maybe you need a couple of extra days of rest instead of training, it's usually best to listen and maybe miss two training sessions versus missing a week or two down the road. So yeah, I think just being in tune with...
with your body as much as you can, just feeling how the legs are responding from day to day and just being really honest with yourself. Those are the methods I use for recovery. Yeah, and if I can add one more thing too, I think, you know, and yeah, maybe don't do every single race that you can do. I think I definitely fell into this trap when I was like, you know, cat two, trying to chase him at one.
you know trying to get more experience and I was just like I just need to do every race you know and I think that definitely ended up working against me at a point you know where it's just like you've been going hard week after week after week and it's just you know you're just not gonna be able to put out your best performances necessarily especially if you're working full-time and all of that it's just like yeah it's just not always the right way to go about it so maybe consider you know skipping a race
Not doing every single one and really focusing on, you know, races you feel you can definitely do well at or you really want to do. One more thing about this. Let's bring it more to the coach perspective. So when you're working with a client who's exhibiting symptoms or like, you know, trying to figure out like, am I tired?
Am I ready to train? I don't know. What kind of feedback would you want from a person so you could guide them better during a season like this?
I think a couple different ways you can look at feedback some of it being objective like you're looking at power files or heart rate or whatever just seeing classic signs of chronic fatigue like depressed heart rate or just lower power than the athlete was doing a month ago even though you've been trying to progress the athlete's workload or something and then just like subjective input as a coach I'm really
I really encourage all the athletes I work with just to provide as much feedback as they can after the workout, like a lot of subjective feelings. Because I think that is maybe overlooked a lot. And sometimes when you look at objective data like heart rate or power, early warning signs might not present themselves.
Whereas subjective, that's more instantaneous. So if someone was telling you, maybe my legs are feeling bad for the day, and you got them doing an interval set, but the power looks spot on or whatever, maybe that's a warning sign for a little bit of overtraining or burnout, maybe a week or two down the road. So yeah, as a coach and an athlete, it's...
It's not easy. It's not an easy concept to be like really in tune with how you're feeling. Like some riders might need like an hour warm up to give like a actually like a true sense of like, are my legs going to be good today or not? So I think it's individualized for everyone.
But yeah, I think getting in the habit of just writing down those subjective feelings after a ride, that process helps you get a little bit more in tune with the physical sensations you're feeling after each workout. And that can lead to refining the training and recovery process. All right, Alex, over to you. Same question. Yeah, I mean, I think Taylor said most of it really got it right. And I agree with what he said. Yeah, I think the other thing.
Something else I definitely look for is the motivation side, which I think ties into mental fatigue. If someone's like, I just didn't want to finish or I just couldn't motivate myself to finish or it was hard to stay in it, like if this was at a race, for example, or even a workout, that to me really says, okay, we need to dial things back and chill out. So I guess if you're feeling like...
I don't want to do this or just not that motivation to push yourself that's really the time you got to like take a step back because I've even found even if you're like let's say fatigued or really tired or going on like day four of a you know long stage race if you are motivated and want to do it you can do well you can like kind of push through that fatigue or what you're feeling and you know often put out something good so yeah so I think that kind of lack of motivation can really
Even if you have really good legs or really good fitness that you've built up, it might not matter, you know, um, if you're not motivated. So, yeah, so that's something I definitely look like, look out for my athletes and try to, um, have them tell me about for sure. So let's get a couple, um, a couple of practical things, um, a couple of practical tips and, uh, training sessions. Um, so what is your favorite race specific workout like for crits?
Like a man, I need, I need some leg speed today, or I need some, I feel like I need some anaerobic capacity. Like, um, you know, that kind of thing where you've been racing and you go, man, I need, I need just a little bit of something. Like what's your favorite session? Uh, I mean, I'm a big fan of like the, either like a classic Tabata style workout, just like 30 on 30 off super full gas. Uh, I feel like mentally I can get through those workouts easier than some.
just because maybe it aligns with my physiology a little bit better or a combination of a lot of things. But yeah, that's usually like something I'll just throw in the mix maybe like a week or two leading up to a race just to like, you know, put the icing on the cake. It's kind of fun to go fast. All right, sets and reps. Give people a workout to do right now. Okay, so yeah, you could just do...
40 seconds as hard as you can with 20 seconds of rest and repeat that six times and maybe do that two or three times with six minutes of rest in between. There you go. You got probably like, what, five minutes of total work, but you're probably going to have to take the rest of the day off after that one. I love that one. You can finish that off in 45 minutes. All right, Alex, your turn. I like that one. I mean, I like that one.
but I don't like that one because it's very painful yeah I like that workout a bunch and I agree I kind of put it maybe I'm getting ready to race races next week or two and yeah it's a good one to get put that icing on the cake another one I like
is like, let's say, you know, maybe a threshold-ish interval or like, you know, maybe 15, 20 minutes and then doing like kind of hard 10, 15, maybe 20, 30 second jump thrown in where you're going, you know, you're adding or you're going 100 watts harder than you're riding or maybe you're sprinting, something like that. Just to kind of mimic that sort of like, you know, going hard.
pushing yourself over your threshold, but then, and then having to kind of settle back in and continue to keep that effort. Cause that's often how a lot of racing is. You're like pushing so hard. Then you're like, Oh wait, I can't let off the gas. I got to keep going. Um, yeah. So I found, I find a workout like that really helps. Um, yeah. Crit warmup. What's your strategy for crit warmup? I know it's kind of individualized, but what do you both personally like? Hmm. Yeah. Uh, I don't really believe in warmups. I don't know. I got mixed feelings.
It's like I've tried everything, right? And like you said, super individualized. I've warmed up hard for 40 minutes and have felt like shit at the beginning of the race. I've not warmed up at all and have gotten to the front right away and some combination of everything in between. So I think for warming up for me is it's like more mental or maybe it's like
If I haven't done a lot of work in the past couple of days, I might need a longer, harder warm-up. But yeah, I think to some degree they're pretty arbitrary at the same time. For USA Crits especially, my experience with racing this year was I would warm up for whatever, 15 to 20 minutes or so. And then you go to staging and you sit in staging for 45 minutes. It's like, why the hell did I even warm up?
So I don't know what the solution to that is, man. Take a pair of rollers to staging with you or, you know, just do whatever you feel like. Have a dance party at staging. Yeah. Keep those legs moving. Yeah, I agree hard. It's been interesting. Yeah, I haven't raced for a long time.
Yeah, I guess I got, I more recently got more to the opinion that, you know, warms just don't really matter that much. Just don't ever think it, just roll around for a bit and then show up and that typically will work. But, and that's, that's not how I approached this year, I guess, but it was, it's kind of been my mentality around it personally for myself. But I would say doing USA Crits, I, I needed to have some sort of warmup in. And I think it.
What you need or what I needed really depended on what my run up to that weekend was, you know, how much was I riding? You know, if I had been traveling all week, I definitely needed to do, you know, maybe openers the day before or something I found worked well was, especially with these races at night, you know, in the morning, get in like an opener style workout. And then, you know, and then when it comes time for race time, you know, you're just rolling around a bit easy. And then, yeah, you're often sitting for a half hour, 40 minutes of staging.
and I found that kind of those kind of day of openers to be really good especially if there have been travel beforehand and so is that something like that might be just you know riding for a bit and then doing like kind of some hard tempo low threshold efforts and then maybe some maybe a few like high cadence sprints stuff like that yeah I found those personally helpful but you know yeah I think it's it's down to the individual and in my experience more anything it's really
what is going on in your training leading up to the race. You know, if you had raced the day before, you don't really need to warm up. You just need to kind of maybe spin around a bit, loosen the legs up, and then that's it. So as you often say, Cole, it depends. Yeah. No, that's true. And I think actually because I've, like my girlfriend, for instance, I was standing right next to her when she was doing all her warmups for like Nationals and Joe Martin.
And based on her feedback, I was making it up on the spot, and it was different every single day. The only thing that we know she needs is an hour of spinning. What goes on top of that, who knows? But without that hour, just the legs are garbage, or they're not as good as they could be. I have some theories on hormonal regulation and whatnot, but I think as you go in a stage race, it seems like that kind of thing is already kind of primed.
seems to be a little less of the intensity kind of necessary. Okay, so last one. Openers, since you mentioned it. I don't think we've ever discussed openers in the podcast before, but what do you think  why do you think openers helps? I'm going to kick this over to you guys because I don't  I have some theories, but they're all theories. And what do you typically do? And if you're going to go middle of the road with a client
like openers like, you know, morning of day before or even two days before, like what kind of session is your like middle of the road session? I always like giving openers that kind of mimic the style of race you're going to do. For instance, like if you're doing a time trial the next day, maybe doing some subthreshold or threshold type openers the day before, maybe for a crit the next day doing like some high cadence sprints or a couple of like just snaps to.
get that system firing. Also depends on the week the athlete just had. If it was a really heavy fatigue week, maybe skipping the openers altogether. And if it's a really light week, maybe adding a little more intensity to the opener. So yeah, definitely depends. And then openers, probably a combination of like
like a mental benefit, just giving your body like a chance to feel out the type of efforts you might need to do the next day. Physical benefits might be having to do with like sympathetic nervous system activation, maybe kind of like get some catecholamines firing in your system. Your body tends to release like pain doling aspects when you do some like high intensity.
So in that sense, it might feel like your legs are becoming more open. It's like a common term, like opening up the legs. That's why they're called openers, aren't they? Exactly. Yeah, I think that just means like dulling those painful sensations to some degree. Alex? Yeah, you know, an opener that I started to really like that you introduced me to, Cole, was kind of the two-day opener, which I think essentially is just kind of like a light workout.
or like light to moderate workout, you know, nothing super, super intense, but like, you know, a workout. And then kind of in that day before the race, maybe it's just an hour, hour and a half of like, just kind of chill spinning around. I think for people who are like working full time or have busy demanding lives, um, those work well. And that, that was my experience. I was like, I feel a lot better when I have kind of a chill day before my race and I'm not doing something like an openers. Cause then I would just kind of, if I had to work the rest of the day, you know, let's say it was Saturday, I would just.
I would roll up to the race. It's not just kind of feel not so fresh and a little more tired. So I think for a lot of folks, um, the two day opener style can be good. Um, and you know, I don't, I'm trying to think, I feel like if it's, you know, maybe a really intense race, a crit. Yeah. I think the most I would give someone is just maybe some high, some high cadence sprints with some, some, you know, maybe easy tempo or threshold, something like that. I found like,
If you're going to be using something or sprinting or going really hard, you don't really want to be doing that like two years before, you know. I guess maybe in some cases it's not a bad idea, but that's just kind of in my experience. And then I think maybe for something like a road race, you know, your openers, you know, if it's a longer road race, you really, you know, that kind of serves as some of that kind of like opening where you're riding a bunch in the beginning and not going super hard. So I think something like a road race, you might not need so much of, you know, like a very specific opener.
it can be a little more open-ended and yeah and I've actually found that one of the things I like about two-day openers is that you know two days before the race you can actually push somebody a little bit harder than the day before the race and you go you know they need this to feel pretty activated and open but also like you know you kind of need a chance to recover sometimes and so you know a lot of people day before the race like I knew a guy whose opener set he would like you know train really hard like Tuesday Wednesday
take Thursday off and then for just spins, barely pushing the pedals like 50 watts for two hours on Friday and Saturday he would just smash everybody. So yeah, it is very, very individualized. All right. Anyway, so USA Crits, let's wrap this up. Any more thoughts that we haven't covered yet? I just want to say, you know, from my experience this year, starting as a total noob, not knowing anything and then
Yeah, working my way through that. If you want to be good at crits and especially a hard, you know, high level crits, practice your cornering. That'd be my number one thing to say to anyone. Just practice, practice, practice as much as you can. And I even started doing this mid-season. I was like, I got to practice this. I got to do this that's sometimes not in a race. So something I found that was really helpful is I found a downhill that would get me going really fast because you're cornering a 30.
Plus miles an hour. So it doesn't matter if you can corner well 20, you got to do it at 30. So I'd find a nice downhill and a quiet neighborhood. And I would just practice taking this corner at, you know, different lines and then really trying to hone in. Okay, what feels best? How am I able to take this corner as much speed as possible? And I guess it's not so much necessarily lines. It's more, when are you exiting the far, the edge of the road?
because ideally you want to take a corner right from the far edge of the road. What am I cutting in? What's that point that will let me hit the apex of the corner nice and tight so I can keep pedaling and exit well so I'm exiting out to the far side of the other road that I'm turning onto. That's what you really got to practice, that moment you take your turn. So I think, yeah, just...
Practice, practice, practice your cornering. Feel really good about it. Do it in the drops. Pedal through the corner. Go fast. Once you're comfortable with that, then you're ready to go. Would you ever take a turn? When you notice people in front of you initiating their turn at a certain point, would you ever go, no, no, no, that's not the right way to do it? Then you either go a little earlier or a little later. Did you ever do that? Yes. Was that the right choice in those cases?
I think a lot of time people just like, you know, I did this in crits. I was just like a lemming. I was like, Oh yeah, this is the way to go. Everybody else is going this way. And I could have saved a lot of energy if I didn't do that. Yeah. I think, you know, I think it was maybe El Paso or maybe it was El Paso, you know, just kind of taking, entering into the corner, taking a little wider, like just again, going more or less to the curb, um, before entering the crit or the corner rather. Um, you know, I just,
again, I want to be able to pedal as much as possible through all the corners. So yeah, just kind of keeping that in mind, you kind of, it kind of becomes second nature. Like, okay, I know I need to like turn at this angle or else I'm going to be too sideways and not be able to pedal. And that's going to work against me. Yeah. Oh, last question for you is tire width and pressure. Like what would you, what would you run on average?
about what's your body weight for reference. Whoa, whoa, whoa. Sorry. Should I never ask a lady any? No. Oh, man. I love it. Getting into the tech side of it. Yeah, I started racing this season on 25 millimeter Vittoria Corsa G2's latex tubes. And I ran those at, and so I guess, you know,
Time of the Year depending, but maybe anywhere from 65, 66, maybe 67 kilos, somewhere in there. I ran those at usually 80 front, 85 rear on 25s. That was okay. And then I switched kind of mid-season to Conti GP 5000s in a 28. And I kind of actually, the shop, I was...
getting it from, they didn't have 25s. So I was like, well, I guess I'm gonna run 28s. And that honestly, I liked riding on 28s so much more. And I ran those. And so actually with the crits and this might have been more placebo or something, I'm not sure, but I found riding even a little bit less pressure than I usually would just made at least feel better or felt better.
It felt better and I felt, okay, I got a little more grip here, stuff like that. It just made me feel more comfortable racing and taking these corners, like again, really fast. So I ran the 28s, I think more around like, you know, in the 70s, maybe 75 front, 80 rear, even a little lower. And I found that to be really nice.
All right, Taylor, anything else we haven't covered that you want to touch on? And then give us your digits, widths, and pressures. Okay. Yeah, with the cornering aspect, super, super important. I agree with Alex 100%. The other thing I'd say would be the positioning. I know a lot of riders are super good at cornering, but then when you put maybe five people around them, their cornering goes to shit.
And that's like it's a it's totally a skill you need to develop is like spatial awareness and being able to corner with people like five wide or like maintaining your position in the corner. Like there's a lot of instances where maybe you're not on the ideal line and you have to scrub speed before the corner and you get passed by like 10 people in the corner. And then you're having to and then you're having to sprint on the straightaway to make up that ground. And then like that's just going to add up to like 50 extra watts you probably didn't need to do throughout the race.
So learning how to be super smooth with the cornering as far as how you maintain the position, that's super important. I think these big level crits, I can't emphasize position enough. Just being able to float in the top 10 wheels turns a super hard race into a very manageable race. So yeah, even Sprinter won on positioning. You can get a rider who is...
Got like a 1200 watt sprint. But if they're able to, you know, sit top 10 wheels the last couple of laps, they're probably going to finish top 10. So yeah, positioning for sure. And then as far as tire pressure goes, yeah, my opinions are like varied on that as well. Like, I don't know, a little bit arbitrary also in my opinion.
A lot of the floor pumps I use, like, are those even accurate? Right? So, like, what do you, like, yeah, it's, I guess you can be precise, but it's hard to be accurate with that kind of stuff. So I took the approach this year of setting up my race wheel set to be, to have, like, a pretty wide rim profile. So I would run, like, 25s for the most part. But if I would measure the actual
Actual tire width on the rim. Typically, they'd measure out to like 28, 29. Because I was basically using a gravel rim set, like an internal diameter of 23 millimeters. So that's got a good aerodynamic effect, as well as being able to run a light tire that's actually going to like ride like a wide tire. So I was using Vittoria Corsas for most of the year. And then towards the end of the year, I was riding the Pirelli P0s.
The Corsas were in 25, they measured 29, and then the Pirellis were 24s, I think, they measured like 26 or 27. But yeah, always a fan of the wider tires, running them tubeless, so I could run even lower pressure. And I was typically running like 70 front, 75 rear at like 150 pounds or so. All right. Thanks, guys. Thanks for coming on. Thanks for having us.
All right, that is our show. Thank you, Alex. Thank you, Taylor, for coming on. If you want to get in touch with either of them, their Instagram handles are xcarmonax and taywar92, Taylor Warren, of course. So hit them up on Instagram if you want. Give them a follow. Give me a follow at Empirical Cycling and participate in the weekend AMAs. Thanks so much for that. It's a lot of fun. I have a ridiculous amount of stories by the time Sunday rolls around sometimes, but I think that's good. That's fun.
if you want to coach for next season please hit me up shoot me an email at empiricalcycling at gmail.com now is a really really really good time to start thinking about that so if it's if you want help getting through your cross season if you want to get ready for road season if you want to you know bang some fitness get that fitness reservoir before a long season next year especially you know hit us up we're really good at that kind of thing so
you know in all levels too and for students of course I don't think I've ever said this on the podcast students price is negotiable also professional athletes I know I know a lot of you are out there listening we are negotiable on prices for you because I know that life is pretty hard as a professional cyclist so reach out to us don't be afraid and I will see everybody in the next episode bye everybody